Global Risk                                            Description

Failure of national governance (e.g. failure of rule of   Inability to govern a nation of geopolitical importance as a
law, corruption, political deadlock, etc.)                result of weak rule of law, corruption or political deadlock.
Inability of regional or global institutions to resolve issues of
Failure of regional or global governance
economic, geopolitical or environmental importance
A bilateral or multilateral dispute between states that
escalates into economic (e.g. trade/currency wars,
Interstate conflict with regional consequences
Geopolitical Risks




resource nationalization), military, cyber, societal or other
conflict.
Individuals or non-state groups with political or religious
Large-scale terrorist attacks                             goals that successfully inflict large-scale human or material
damage.
State collapse of geopolitical importance due to internal
State collapse or crisis (e.g. civil conflict, military
violence, regional or global instability, military coup, civil
coup, failed states, etc.)
conflict, failed states, etc.
The deployment of nuclear, chemical, biological and
Weapons of mass destruction                               radiological technologies and materials, creating
international crises and potential for significant destruction
Poorly planned cities, urban sprawl and associated
Failure of urban planning                                 infrastructure that create social, environmental and health
challenges
Inadequate, unaffordable, or unreliable access to
Food crises                                               appropriate quantities and quality of food and nutrition on a
major scale
Large-scale involuntary migration induced by conflict,
Large-scale involuntary migration
disasters, environmental or economic reasons
Societal Risks




Major social movements or protests (e.g. street riots,
Profound social instability                               social unrest, etc.) that disrupt political or social stability,
negatively impacting populations and economic activity
Bacteria, viruses, parasites or fungi that cause uncontrolled
spread of infectious diseases (for instance as a result of
Rapid and massive spread of infectious diseases
resistance to antibiotics, antivirals and other treatments)
leading to widespread fatalities and economic disruption
A significant decline in the available quality and quantity of
Water crises                                              fresh water, resulting in harmful effects on human health
and/or economic activity
Intended or unintended adverse consequences of
technological advances such as artificial intelligence,
Adverse consequences of technological advances
geo-engineering and synthetic biology causing human,
environmental and economic damage
Technological Risks




Cyber dependency that increases vulnerability to outage
Breakdown of critical information infrastructure and
of critical information infrastructure (e.g. internet, satellites,
networks
etc.) and networks, causing widespread disruption
Large-scale cyberattacks or malware causing large
Large-scale cyberattacks                                  economic damages, geopolitical tensions or widespread
loss of trust in the internet
Wrongful exploitation of private or official data that takes
Massive incident of data fraud/theft
place on an unprecedented scale




62                    The Global Risks Report 2017
