Extreme weather events               Major property, infrastructure, and/or environmental damage as well as
(e.g. floods, storms, etc.)          loss of human life caused by extreme weather events

The failure of governments and businesses to enforce or enact effective
Failure of climate-change
measures to mitigate climate change, protect populations and help
mitigation and adaptation
businesses impacted by climate change to adapt
Environmental




Major biodiversity loss and
Irreversible consequences for the environment, resulting in severely
ecosystem collapse
depleted resources for humankind as well as industries
(terrestrial or marine)

Major natural disasters
Major property, infrastructure, and/or environmental damage as well
(e.g. earthquakes, tsunamis,
as loss of human life caused by geophysical disasters such as earth-
volcanic eruptions,
quakes, volcanic activity, landslides, tsunamis, or geomagnetic storms
geomagnetic storms)

Man-made environmental
Failure to prevent major man-made damage and disasters, including
damage and disasters (e.g.
environmental crime, causing harm to human lives and health, infra-
oil spills, radioactive
structure, property, economic activity and the environment
contamination, etc.)




Failure of national
governance (e.g. failure of          Inability to govern a nation of geopolitical importance as a result of
rule of law, corruption, political   weak rule of law, corruption or political deadlock
deadlock, etc.)

Failure of regional or global        Inability of regional or global institutions to resolve issues of economic,
governance                           geopolitical, or environmental importance

A bilateral or multilateral dispute between states that escalates into
Geopolitical




Interstate conflict with
economic (e.g. trade/currency wars, resource nationalization), military,
regional consequences
cyber, societal, or other conflict

Individuals or non-state groups with political or religious goals that suc-
Large-scale terrorist attacks
cessfully inflict large-scale human or material damage

State collapse or crisis (e.g.
State collapse of geopolitical importance due to internal violence, re-
civil conflict, military coup,
gional or global instability, military coup, civil conflict, failed states, etc.
failed states, etc.)

The deployment of nuclear, chemical, biological, and radiological tech-
Weapons of mass
nologies and materials, creating international crises and potential for
destruction
significant destruction




The Global Risks Report 2019   97
