to cross-border business and
constraints on labour mobility.

The backdrop of pronounced
geopolitical uncertainty and
increasingly transactional approaches
to interstate relations increases
the risk that economic disputes
will flare up. We can distinguish
between (1) disputes stemming
from tensions between countries’
economic agendas and policies,
and (2) geopolitical tensions—up to
and including military conflict—that
cause disruption to economies and
markets. The results of the GRPS
The two countries that experienced
are pessimistic in this regard: the
the most disruptive political results in
overwhelming majority of respondents
2016—the United Kingdom and the
expect the risks of interstate military
United States—have both entered a
conflict or incursion to increase in
period of uncertainty and volatility in
2018. New technologies add a layer of
their external economic relations. The
economic vulnerability to geopolitical
United Kingdom is in the process of
disruptions, with emerging risks
leaving the European Union, while the
of asymmetric economic warfare
United States has withdrawn from
including potential cyberattacks
the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP)
designed to disrupt critical financial
and is seeking a renegotiation of the
infrastructure.
North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA).
It is striking how sanguine financial
markets have remained while political
Mercantilist and protectionist
and geopolitical risk has jumped in
pressures have been building in
recent years. Given current market
many countries for years: according
dynamics, it may not be rational for
to Global Trade Alert, protectionist
any single market participant to price
interventions have increased
in rising political and geopolitical
markedly since 2012. A new high
tensions. The risk is that we will hit a
was recorded 2016, when 571 of the
tipping point at which point everyone
771 trade interventions tracked by
prices in these tensions, with a rush to
Global Trade Alert were characterized
the exits that hits asset prices, strains
as discriminatory and just 200 as
the resilience of the global financial
liberalizing. Early data for 2017 point to
system and tests whether policy-
a continuation of this trend, particularly
makers retain the firepower to prevent
in the United States, where the first six
deep and long-lasting impacts on the
months of the year saw a 26% jump in
real economy.
trade actions against G20 partners.28
The risk of economic damage is not
restricted to trade protectionism—
mercantilism and unilateralism could
trigger a wider deterioration of global
interconnectedness, including reduced
investment flows, increased obstacles


The Global Risks Report 2018   23
