Global Risk                                            Description

Failure of national governance (e.g. failure of rule of   Inability to govern a nation of geopolitical importance due
law, corruption, political deadlock, etc.)                to weak rule of law, corruption or political deadlock.
A bilateral or multilateral dispute between states escalates
Interstate conflict with regional consequences            into economic (e.g. trade/currency wars, resource
nationalization), military, cyber, societal or other conflict.
Geopolitical Risks




Individuals or non-state groups with political or religious
Large-scale terrorist attacks                             goals successfully inflict large-scale human or material
damage.
State collapse of geopolitical importance due to internal
State collapse or crisis (e.g. civil conflict, military
violence, regional or global instability, military coup, civil
coup, failed states, etc.)
conflict, failed states, etc.
Nuclear, chemical, biological and radiological technologies
Weapons of mass destruction                               and materials are deployed creating international crises
and potential for significant destruction.
Poorly planned cities, urban sprawl and associated
Failure of urban planning                                 infrastructure create social, environmental and health
challenges.
Access to appropriate quantities and quality of food and
Food crises                                               nutrition becomes inadequate, unaffordable or unreliable
on a major scale.
Large-scale involuntary migration induced by conflict,
Large-scale involuntary migration
disasters, environmental or economic reasons.
Societal Risks




Major social movements or protests (e.g. street riots, social
Profound social instability                               unrest, etc.) disrupt political or social stability, negatively
impacting populations and economic activity.
Bacteria, viruses, parasites or fungi cause uncontrolled
spread of infectious diseases (for instance due to
Rapid and massive spread of infectious diseases
resistance to antibiotics, antivirals and other treatments)
leading to widespread fatalities and economic disruption.
A significant decline in the available quality and quantity of
Water crises                                              fresh water resulting in harmful effects on human health
and/or economic activity.
Intended or unintended adverse consequences of
technological advances such as artificial intelligence,
Adverse consequences of technological advances
geo-engineering and synthetic biology causing human,
environmental and economic damage.
Technological Risks




Cyber dependency increases vulnerability to outage of
Breakdown of critical information infrastructure and
critical information infrastructure (e.g. internet, satellites,
networks
etc.) and networks causing widespread disruption.
Large-scale cyberattacks or malware causing large
Large-scale cyberattacks                                  economic damages, geopolitical tensions or widespread
loss of trust in the Internet.
Wrongful exploitation of private or official data that takes
Massive incident of data fraud/theft
place on an unprecedented scale.




86                    The Global Risks Report 2016
