Appendix A: Description of Global Risks and Trends 2016

Global Risks
A “global risk” is defined as an uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, can cause significant negative impact for several
countries or industries within the next 10 years.


Global Risk                                                   Description

Unsustainably overpriced assets such as commodities,
Asset bubble in a major economy
housing, shares, etc. in a major economy or region.
Prolonged ultra-low inflation or deflation in a major
Deflation in a major economy
economy or region.

Collapse of a financial institution and/or malfunctioning of a
Failure of a major financial mechanism or institution
financial system impacts the global economy.

Failure to adequately invest in, upgrade and secure
infrastructure networks (e.g. energy, transportation and
Failure/shortfall of critical infrastructure
communications) leads to pressure or a breakdown with
system-wide implications.
Excessive debt burdens generate sovereign debt crises
Fiscal crises in key economies
and/or liquidity crises.
Economic Risks




A sustained high level of unemployment or underutilization
of the productive capacity of the employed population
High structural unemployment or underemployment
prevents the economy from attaining high levels of
employment.
Large-scale activities outside the legal framework such
as illicit financial flow, tax evasion, human trafficking,
Illicit trade (e.g. illicit financial flow, tax evasion,
counterfeiting and organized crime undermine social
human trafficking, organized crime, etc.)
interactions, regional or international collaboration and
global growth.
Energy price increases or decreases significantly and
Severe energy price shock (increase or decrease)           places further economic pressures on highly energy-
dependent industries and consumers.
Unmanageable increase in the general price level of goods
Unmanageable inflation
and services in key economies.
Major property, infrastructure and environmental damage
Extreme weather events (e.g. floods, storms, etc.)
as well as human loss caused by extreme weather events.
Governments and businesses fail to enforce or enact
effective measures to mitigate climate change, protect
Failure of climate-change mitigation and adaptation
populations and help businesses impacted by climate
change to adapt.
Environmental Risks




Irreversible consequences for the environment, resulting
Major biodiversity loss and ecosystem collapse (land
in severely depleted resources for humankind as well as
or ocean)
industries.
Major property, infrastructure and environmental damage
Major natural catastrophes (e.g. earthquake,               as well as human loss caused by geophysical disasters
tsunami, volcanic eruption, geomagnetic storms)            such as earthquakes, volcanic activity, landslides, tsunamis
or geomagnetic storms.
Failure to prevent major man-made catastrophes, causing
Man-made environmental catastrophes (e.g. oil spill,
harm to lives, human health, infrastructure, property,
radioactive contamination, etc.)
economic activity and the environment.


The Global Risks Report 2016   85
