Part 1
Box 1.5: Pathways to Resilience: Effective Leadership and Institutional Values

Global risks recognize no geographic boundaries. Whether from natural or man-made or cyber disasters, the cascading effects
can be felt oceans away. Escalating terrorist attacks in Africa, Europe and the Middle East; natural disasters related to climate




Part 2
change; and health disasters from infectious diseases increasingly impose both economic and human costs. How can the
global community prevent or mitigate the adverse effects of catastrophic events in our increasingly complex and quickly evolving
environment?

The Global Agenda Council (GAC) on Risk and Resilience advocates four key activities for companies, organizations and
governments to build resilience at national and global levels.1 These recommendations resulted from a detailed study of entities
that proved to be resilient in recent disasters, including Nepal’s 2015 earthquake, the 2014 Ebola outbreak and Chile’s 2010
earthquake, along with an assessment of data from four sources including the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development, the U.N. Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the World Bank and the Zurich Insurance Group.




Part 3
1. Clarify roles and responsibilities. During a crisis, it is critical to have clearly delineated and understood senior official and
c-suite executive roles and responsibilities for risk and incident management. Confusion around “who is in charge” or “who has
authority” wastes crucial time and resources, and makes response and recovery less efficient and effective. The need for
well-defined roles becomes heightened when an organization faces novel or rapid-onset disasters or emergencies, such as
those resulting from cyberattacks. Pre-determining, training and exercising roles, capabilities and plans helps to ensure an
organization’s risk readiness. The successful management of complex crises also requires a capacity for adaptability and
flexibility. Crisis managers must be able to adjust pre-established plans as needed given the unique characteristics of the crisis.

2. Develop Crisis Leadership Characteristics. Organizations that successfully position for, respond to and recover from




Part 4
major events also consistently have effective leadership – the qualities and actions of those with authority and influence can
empower their entities to be resilient. Such leaders are steady and decisive in the face of uncertainty and pressure. They make
decisions in a timely and prioritized way, and communicate them transparently. Recognizing that they cannot address risks
alone, they galvanize others and are clear about what assistance they require. They understand when a disaster requires them
to cut through policies that may prevent or delay action. Leaders who are effective during and after a crisis are those who have
earned trust through their demonstration of openness, transparency, responsiveness and accountability. They are seen as
honest and standing up against corruption. For example, an IMF assessment attributes much of Chile’s effective recovery from
the 2010 earthquake to the nation’s “technocratic, rules-based, and transparent” leadership – and to its institutional practices,
including the rule of law.2 Another example is seen in Norwegian Prime Minister Jens Stoltenberg’s speech in the wake of the
July 2011 terrorist attacks in Norway, which demonstrated how leadership during a crisis can significantly result in both
increased trust in government and meet citizens’ expectations of responsiveness. These examples also highlight the role of
meaning making – that is, the capacity for leaders to make sense of an adverse event and articulate to the public a clear path
forward in a state of emergency.

3. Leverage expertise. When confronted with an unprecedented emergency, strategic crisis managers must be able to quickly
identify and mobilize the most relevant and trustworthy expertise to help understand and respond to the crisis. Knowledge
management systems and expert networks need to be set up in advance and across multiple sectoral, professional and
disciplinary boundaries. Understanding the implications of the crisis beyond the immediate consequences and anticipating the
potential pathways of cascading effects requires appropriate crisis management structures that enable additional expertise to
formally support decision-making. For example, the United Kingdom’s Scientific Advisory Group in Emergency (SAGE) is an
independent support group that provides science-based expertise for the management of complex and unprecedented crises
to the UK cabinet. Access to such expert “force-multipliers” could help both public and private entities understand and address
the unique aspects of a crisis. Having access to specialized expertise is especially crucial for novel or multi-faceted evolving
crises – such as the Great East Japan Earthquake, which impacted the Fukushima nuclear reactor and caused many
companies to struggle with what decisions to make.

4. Create a culture of integrated risk management and multistakeholder partnerships. Another necessary institutional
value is the recognition of the scope of global risks and the need for partnerships to address them. A culture of risk
management – the beliefs, norms and values that underpin daily actions – must span the whole organization, including its
supply chains. Entities can no longer afford to have different types of risks managed by different policies and operating
procedures and by different officials, executives and agencies. All parts of an organization must collaborate transparently on risk
management through integrated planning because of the potential for risks to have cascading consequences, including
spillovers between the virtual and physical realms – for example, a flood disabling a server farm, or a cyberattack interrupting
electricity supply.




The Global Risks Report 2016   19
