Box 6.2

Responding to COVID-19 :                                               Perceived effectiveness of regional and
global COVID-19 response in the GRPS

Regional Characteristics                                               1 = COMPLETE FAILURE, 5 = COMPLETE SUCCESS




Sub-Saharan Africa                                Regional: 3.07             Global: 2.51


Experience with infectious diseases meant health professionals and political leaders in Africa were
on high alert and coordinating as soon as the region’s ﬁrst cases were reported. Relatively swift
policy responses to limit spread and the beneﬁts of a younger age proﬁle compensated for health
system weaknesses and kept mortality rates lower than they might have been in the initial wave,
although infection and mortality rates were rising at the time of publication.




Central and Latin America                         Regional: 2.99             Global: 2.40



Countries in Central and Latin America implemented some of the world’s most stringent travel
controls and lockdowns, with the virus arriving later than in other areas. However, cultural
resistance in some countries, a high degree of employment informality, limited social protection
mechanisms and decades of health system underfunding resulted in lower levels of compliance,
stretched health systems and high mortality rates.




East Asia and the Pacific                         Regional: 3.52             Global: 2.37



Remembering the SARS epidemic, many countries in East Asia moved quickly, implementing a
combination of travel bans, lockdowns and extensive testing with contact tracing, quickly targeting
fresh outbreaks. High degrees of compliance, comfort with technology, cultural norms of collective
responsibility and familiarity with mask-wearing helped public health measures “bend the curve”.
With continuous upgrading of public health strategies, many countries are now looking to ease
measures such as travel bans.

Taking advantage of their geography, many Paciﬁc islands remain relatively unscathed as a result of
the early closure of borders. More-advanced island economies, such as Australia and New
Zealand, were able to implement and sustain strict lockdowns to contain periodic outbreaks.




Europe                                            Regional: 2.99             Global: 2.40



In the highly interconnected economies of Europe, a combination of sovereign priorities, regional
autonomy or devolved powers, and sensitivity to the rights of individuals complicated the national
implementation of public health measures and international collaboration. Pressure to re-establish
normalcy over the summer of 2020 precipitated a new wave of cases in autumn. Governments
proved reluctant to re-impose national lockdowns.




Middle East and North Africa                      Regional: 2.68             Global: 2.46



In the Middle East and North Africa, capacities and responses varied greatly but relatively young
populations may have spared the region from higher death tolls; however, data in some locations
are uncertain. Some nations with advanced medical systems and regimes able to enforce
lockdowns and other social restrictions along with border controls have managed successive
waves of infections. Other, poorer nations, and those that are fragile and in conﬂict situations,
however, are suﬀering exacerbated economic and humanitarian challenges.




The Global Risks Report 2021   79
