Part 1




Part 3:
The previous sections of this Report
have explored the ways in which global
risks are becoming more imminent,
impacting more people’s lives,


Risks in Focus                      economies and institutions. This part
of the Report explores the Global Risks
Part 2




Landscape 2016 and the Global Risks
Interconnections Map 2016 through a
societal lens. Because well-functioning
societies are at the core of international
security and are key to strengthening
resilience, this section presents an
in-depth exploration of three distinct
angles that relate to societies: the three
Risks in Focus. To motivate action,
each of the Risks in Focus includes
Part 3




examples of practical initiatives that can
be implemented to build resilience.

One of the key risks related to the
advancing digitization of societies
concerns the tension between
the ways in which technology is
empowering citizens and the growing
sense of political disempowerment
felt by many of those citizens. Rising
Part 4




income disparity and a shortage of
quality employment opportunities –
that could be further exacerbated by
the Fourth Industrial Revolution – along
with extreme weather events and
heightened migration flows are among
the factors that could leave societies
deeply unsettled.

Against this background, the first Risk
in Focus introduces the concept of
the “(dis)empowered citizen” and
discusses potential consequences for
social stability. The second contribution
explores food security – a necessary
condition for social stability – which is
increasingly under threat from failure
to mitigate and adapt to climate
change; this Risk in Focus builds on
the findings of Part 1. Finally, the third
Risk in Focus discusses the potential
of future pandemics to threaten social
cohesion.

The world has navigated previous eras
of profound transitions resulting from
converging economic, technological
and geopolitical developments. But
with a faster pace of change and more
complex interconnections, the stakes
have never been higher.




38   The Global Risks Report 2016
