Preface                                                                          As in previous years, the analysis
contained in this Report builds on the
annual Global Risks Perception Survey,
completed by almost 750 members of
the World Economic Forum’s global
multistakeholder community.

The year 2017 will present a pivotal
moment for the global community. The
threat of a less cooperative, more
inward-looking world also creates the
opportunity to address global risks and
the trends that drive them. This will
require responsive and responsible
leadership with a deeper commitment
to inclusive development and equitable
growth, both nationally and globally. It
The year 2016 has seen profound               will also require collaboration across
shifts in the way we view global risks.       multiple interconnected systems,
Societal polarization, income inequality      countries, areas of expertise, and
and the inward orientation of countries       stakeholder groups with the aim of
are spilling over into real-world politics.   having a greater societal impact. We
Through recent electoral results in G7        hope that The Global Risks Report
countries, these trends are set to have       2017 and the subsequent deliberations
a lasting impact on the way economies         at the World Economic Forum’s Annual
act and relate to each other. They are        Meeting 2017 will contribute to a
also likely to affect global risks and the    debate about pragmatic solutions.
interconnections between them.

Against the background of these
developments, this year’s Global Risks
Report explores five gravity centres
that will shape global risks. First,
continued slow growth combined with
high debt and demographic change
creates an environment that favours
financial crises and growing inequality.      Klaus Schwab
Founder and Executive Chairman
At the same time, pervasive corruption,
World Economic Forum
short-termism and unequal distribution
of the benefits of growth suggest that
the capitalist economic model may not
be delivering for people. The transition
towards a more multipolar world order
is putting global cooperation under
strain. At the same time, the Fourth
Industrial Revolution is fundamentally
transforming societies, economies,
and ways of doing business. Last but
not least, as people seek to reassert
identities that have been blurred by
globalization, decision-making is
increasingly influenced by emotions.

In addition to these gravity centres, this
year’s Global Risks Report presents
deep-dive discussions of risks posed
by ongoing political and societal
transformations, including challenges
to democracy, closing space for civil
society, and outmoded social
protection systems. It also discusses
risks related to emerging technologies
of the Fourth Industrial Revolution and
the associated governance challenges.

4   The Global Risks Report 2017
