Part 1
Figure 3.2.1: Global Financing for AI Start-Ups, 2011–2015

397


307




Part 2
196

131                                                        $2,388
$2,177

67
$757
$282           $415

2011 		        2012 		               2013              2014                 2015




Part 3
Disclosed investment (US$m)             Number of deals


Source: CB Insights 2016.




Box 3.2.1: Artificial Intelligence and the Future of Warfare - by Jean-Marc Rickli, Geneva Centre for Security
Policy


One sector that saw the huge disruptive potential of AI from an early stage is the military. The weaponization of AI will
represent a paradigm shift in the way wars are fought, with profound consequences for international security and stability.
Serious investment in autonomous weapon systems (AWS) began a few years ago; in July 2016 the Pentagon’s Defense
Science Board published its first study on autonomy, but there is no consensus yet on how to regulate the development of
these weapons.

The international community started to debate the emerging technology of lethal autonomous weapons systems (LAWS) in
the framework of the United Nations Convention on Conventional Weapon (CCW) in 2014. Yet, so far, states have not
agreed on how to proceed. Those calling for a ban on AWS fear that human beings will be removed from the loop, leaving
decisions on the use lethal force to machines, with ramifications we do not yet understand.

There are lessons here from non-military applications of AI. Consider the example of AlphaGo, the AI Go-player created by
Google’s DeepMind division, which in March last year beat the world’s second-best human player. Some of AlphaGo’s
moves puzzled observers, because they did not fit usual human patterns of play. DeepMind CEO Demis Hassabis
explained the reason for this difference as follows: “unlike humans, the AlphaGo program aims to maximize the probability
of winning rather than optimizing margins”. If this binary logic – in which the only thing that matters is winning while the
margin of victory is irrelevant – were built into an autonomous weapons system, it would lead to the violation of the principle
of proportionality, because the algorithm would see no difference between victories that required it to kill one adversary or
1,000.

Autonomous weapons systems will also have an impact on strategic stability. Since 1945, the global strategic balance has
prioritized defensive systems – a priority that has been conducive to stability because it has deterred attacks. However, the
strategy of choice for AWS will be based on swarming, in which an adversary’s defence system is overwhelmed with a
concentrated barrage of coordinated simultaneous attacks. This risks upsetting the global equilibrium by neutralizing the
defence systems on which it is founded. This would lead to a very unstable international configuration, encouraging
escalation and arms races and the replacement of deterrence by pre-emption.

We may already have passed the tipping point for prohibiting the development of these weapons. An arms race in
autonomous weapons systems is very likely in the near future. The international community should tackle this issue with the
utmost urgency and seriousness because, once the first fully autonomous weapons are deployed, it will be too late to go
back.




The Global Risks Report 2017   49
